---
layout: post
title: AI Prompting 101
comments: true
tags: ai prompt chatGPT gpt gemini copilot
---

Last week, on 2024.05.14, Google updated their Gemini AI models and conducted a demo. They also released a short document titled "Prompting Guide 101". While the document covers a broad range of topics and is not specifically focused on software development, it provides useful information on how to use prompts effectively, with examples included.

This prompting guide was initially created for Gemini, but its principles are applicable to all GPTs, such as ChatGPT.

Quoting directly from their freely available PDF:
Taking it directly from their free PDF:

### Writing effective prompts
There are four main areas to consider when writing an effective prompt. You don’t need to use all four,
but using a few will help!

- Persona
- Task
- Context
- Format


Here is an example of a prompt using all four areas that could work well in Gmail and Google Docs:


```
You are a Google Cloud program manager. Draft an executive summary email to [persona] based on
[details about relevant program docs]. Limit to bullet points.
```

Here are quick tips to get you started with Gemini for Workspace:
1. Use natural language. Write as if you’re speaking to another person. Express complete thoughts in
full sentences.
1. Be specific and iterate. Tell Gemini for Workspace what you need it to do (summarize, write, change the
tone, create). Provide as much context as possible.
1. Be concise and avoid complexity. State your request in brief — but specific — language. Avoid jargon.
2. Make it a conversation. Fine-tune your prompts if the results don’t meet your expectations or if you believe
there’s room for improvement. Use follow-up prompts and an iterative process of review and refinement to
yield better results.

Other important part of the document:

### Leveling up your prompt writing
This guide is meant to serve as inspiration, but the possibilities are nearly endless with Gemini for Google
Workspace. Try these additional tips to build on your prompt-writing skills.

- Break it up. If you want Gemini for Workspace to perform several related tasks, break them into
separate prompts.
- Give constraints. To generate specific results, include details in your prompt such as character count limits
or the number of options you’d like to generate.
- Assign a role. To encourage creativity, assign a role. You can do this by starting your prompt with language
like: “You are the head of a creative department for a leading advertising agency …”
- Ask for feedback. In your conversation with Gemini at gemini.google.com, tell it that you’re giving it a project,
include all the details you have and everything you know, and then describe the output you want. Continue the
conversation by asking questions like, “What questions do you have for me that would help you provide the
best output?”
- Consider tone. Tailor your prompts to suit your intended audience and desired tone of the content.
Ask for a specific tone such as formal, informal, technical, creative, or casual in the output.
- Say it another way. Fine-tune your prompts if the results don’t meet your expectations or if you believe


Be sure to check their guide, because they have a lot of examples!

### Sources

- [Prompting guide 101](https://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/gemini-for-google-workspace-prompting-guide-101.pdf)
- [Gemini Release Updates](https://gemini.google.com/updates)  
